Update gradle plugin documentation for new plugins (#2140)
smithy-lang/smithy: docs/source-2.0/guides/gradle-plugin/index.rst

.. _smithy-gradle-plugin:

=====================
Smithy Gradle Plugins
=====================

The `Smithy Gradle plugins`_ integrate Smithy with the `Gradle`_ build system. These plugin can
build artifacts from Smithy models, generate JARs that contain Smithy models
found in Java projects, and generate JARs that contain filtered :ref:`projections <projections>`

> of Smithy models.

Reviewer: Pretty wordy. Maybe
```
build artifacts from Smithy models, and generate JARs for Smithy models and model projections.
```

    and tags to the JAR's MANIFEST. The ``smithy-jar`` plugin applies the ``smithy-base`` plugin when
    applied.

.. admonition:: Which plugin should I use?
    :class: note

    Most users should use the ``smithy-jar`` plugin. If you are building shared model packages,
    custom traits, custom linters, or codegen integrations you should use the ``smithy-jar`` plugin.
    If you are writing a code generator you can use the ``smithy-base`` plugin to set up basic
    `Configuration`_'s and provide access to Smithy gradle tasks.

.. _plugin-apply:

Applying Plugins
----------------

The Smithy Gradle plugins are applied using the ``plugins`` block of a gradle build script.
The following example configures a project to use the ``smithy-base`` Gradle plugin:

.. tab:: Kotlin

    .. code-block:: kotlin
        :caption: build.gradle.kts

        plugins {
            id("software.amazon.smithy.gradle.smithy-base").version("0.10.0")
        }

.. tab:: Groovy

    .. code-block:: groovy
        :caption: build.gradle

        plugins {
            id 'software.amazon.smithy.gradle.smithy-base' version '0.10.0'
        }

.. _smithy-model-sources:

.. note::

>     The ``smithy-jar`` plugin requires that a JVM plugin that creates a JAR task,

Reviewer: ```
requires that a JAR task be registered before it is applied. The `Java Plugin`_ or `Kotlin JVM plugin`_ both provide JAR tasks.
```

or something like that.

    smithy init --list --url https://github.com/smithy-lang/smithy-gradle-plugin

Configuration
=============

Smithy model sources
--------------------

Smithy gradle plugins assume Smithy model files (``*.smithy``) are organized in a similar way as Java source files,
in sourceSets. The smithy-base plugin adds a new sources block named smithy to every sourceSet.
By default, this source block will include Smithy models in:

* ``model/``
* ``src/$sourceSetName/smithy``
* ``src/$sourceSetName/resources/META-INF/smithy``

New source directories can be added to a smithy sources block as follows:

.. tab:: Kotlin

    .. code-block:: kotlin
        :caption: build.gradle.kts

        sourceSets {
            main {
                smithy {
                    srcDir("includes")
                }
            }
        }

.. tab:: Groovy

    .. code-block:: groovy
        :caption: build.gradle

        sourceSets {
            main {
                smithy {
                    srcDir 'includes'
                }
            }
        }

Models found in these directories are combined into a flattened directory
structure and used to validate and build the Smithy model. A Smithy manifest

> file is automatically created for the detected models, and it along with the

Reviewer: `and it, along with the model files,`

> file is automatically created for the detected models, and it along with the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
file is automatically created for the detected models, and it, along with the
```

model files, are placed in the ``META-INF/smithy/`` resource of the created

> JAR. Any project that then depends on this created JAR will be able to find

Reviewer: ```suggestion
JAR. Any project that depends on this created JAR will be able to find
```

and use the Smithy models contained in the JAR when using *model discovery*.

Dependencies
------------

The Smithy build plugins use two different configurations to search for dependencies
such as shared models or :ref:`smithy build plugins <plugins>`:

* ``runtimeClasspath``:
    Runtime dependencies that will be required by any output JARS or publications.
    For example, a shared model package or Java trait definition.
* ``smithyBuild``:
    Build dependencies that are not required by output models.

Runtime dependencies can be added directly to the ``runtimeClasspath`` configuration

> or to a configuration that extends ``runtimeClasspath`` such as the ``implementation``

Reviewer: ```suggestion
or to a configuration that extends ``runtimeClasspath``, such as the ``implementation``
```

configuration added by the ``java-library`` plugin.

Build Dependencies
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> The ``smithy-base`` plugin adds a ``smithyBuild`` `Configuration`_ that can be used to specify
> dependencies that will only be used for calling ``smithy build`` but will not be treated as
> runtime dependencies for any output JARs or publications. These are similar to `compileOnly`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The ``smithy-base`` plugin adds a ``smithyBuild`` `Configuration`_ that can be used to specify
dependencies used when calling ``smithy build``. These dependencies will not be included in any output JARs or publications. They are akin to`compileOnly`
```

        projections so that the Smithy models found in each matching JAR are
        placed into the projection JAR.
    * - allowUnknownTraits
      - ``boolean``
      - Sets whether or not unknown traits in the model should be ignored. By
        default, the build will fail if unknown traits are encountered.
    * - fork
      - ``boolean``
      - By default, the CLI is run in the same process as Gradle,
        but inside a thread with a custom class loader. This should
        work in most cases, but there is an option to run inside a
        process if necessary.
    * - outputDirectory
      - ``Directory``
      - Defines where Smithy build artifacts are written.

.. _dependencies:

Customize output directory
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

By default, Smithy build artifacts will be placed in the project build
directory in a ``smithyprojections/`` directory. There are two ways to override
the output directory. The first method is to set the ``outputDirectory`` property
in the ``smithy-build.json`` config for your Smithy project. For example:

.. code-block:: json
    :caption: smithy-build.json

    {
        "outputDirectory": "build/output"
    }

> The output directory can also be configured for the plugin using the ``smithy``
> extension:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The other method is to configure the plugin using the ``smithy`` extension:
```

.. tab:: Kotlin

    .. code-block:: kotlin
        :caption: build.gradle.kts

        smithy {
            outputDirectory.set(file("path/to/output"))
        }

.. tab:: Groovy

    .. code-block:: groovy
        :caption: build.gradle

        smithy {
            outputDirectory = file("path/to/output")
        }

.. note::

    Setting the output directory on the plugin extension will
    override any ``outputDirectory`` property set in the
    smithy-build config.

Set ``smithy-build`` configs to use
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

By default, the plugin will look for a file called ``smithy-build.json``
at the project's root and will use that as the :ref:`smithy-build config <smithy-build>`

> for your project. If no smithy-build.json file is found then an empty build config

Reviewer: ```suggestion
for your project. If no smithy-build.json file is found, then an empty build config
```

is used to build the project.

Alternatively, you can explicitly configure one or more smithy-build configs to use for
your project as follows:

.. tab:: Kotlin

    .. code-block:: kotlin
        :caption: build.gradle.kts

        smithy {
            smithyBuildConfigs.set(files("smithy-build-config.json"))
        }

.. tab:: Groovy

    .. code-block:: groovy
        :caption: build.gradle

        smithy {
            smithyBuildConfigs = files("smithy-build-config.json")
        }

Set Smithy Tags to add to a JAR
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> When the smithy-jar plugin is applied to a project it can add a number of Smithy

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When the smithy-jar plugin is applied to a project, it can add a number of Smithy
```

        smithy {
            fork.set(true)
        }

.. tab:: Groovy

    .. code-block:: groovy
        :caption: build.gradle

        smithy {
            fork = true
        }

Disable Smithy Formatter
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

By default, the :ref:`Smithy CLI <smithy-cli>` ``format`` command is
executed on all source directories. This opinionated formatter follows
the best practices recommended by the Smithy team. It is possible to disable
the formatter by setting the format setting on the plugin extension to false:

.. tab:: Kotlin

    .. code-block::
        :caption: build.gradle.kts

        smithy {
            format.set(false)
        }

.. tab:: Groovy

    .. code-block:: groovy
        :caption: build.gradle

        smithy {
            format = false
        }

.. _building-smithy-models:

Building Smithy models
======================

The ``smithyBuild`` task that builds smithy models operates in two different modes:

1. If no ``projection`` is specified for the ``SmithyExtension``, then the task
   runs a "source" build using the "source" projection.
2. If a ``projection`` is specified for the ``SmithyExtension``, then the task

>    runs in a "projection" mode.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   runs in "projection" mode.
```

            }

.. tab:: Groovy

        .. code-block:: Groovy
            :caption: build.gradle

            plugins {
                id 'java-library'
                'software.amazon.smithy.gradle.smithy-jar' version '0.10.0'
            }

            // The SmithyExtension is used to customize the build. This example
            // doesn't set any values and can be completely omitted.
            smithy {}

            repositories {
                mavenLocal()
                mavenCentral()
            }

            dependencies {
                implementation 'software.amazon.smithy:smithy-model:__smithy_version__'

                // These are just examples of dependencies. This model has a dependency on
                // a "common" model package and uses the external AWS traits.
                implementation 'com.foo.baz:foo-model-internal-common:1.0.0'
                implementation 'software.amazon.smithy:smithy-aws-traits:__smithy_version__'
            }

.. _generating-projection:

Generating a projection
-----------------------

A "projection" build is run when a :ref:`projection <projections>` is

> specified in the ``SmithyExtension``. You might want to create a projection of
> a model if you need to maintain an internal version of a model that contains
> more information and features than an external version of a model published to
> your customers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
specified in the ``SmithyExtension``. You might create a projection of
a model if you need to maintain an internal version of a model that contains
more information and features than an external version of a model published to
your customers.
```

Any projected models should be added to the ``smithyBuild`` configuration. This
prevents packages with projected models from appearing as dependencies of the
projected version of the model.

> The following example gradle build script will run a "projection"
> build that uses the "external" projection.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following example gradle build script will run a "projection"
build using the "external" projection.
```
